KEP-4346: client-go: Add informer metrics (#4349)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-api-machinery/4346-informer-metrics/README.md

#### Story 2
Users want to know how many times the reflector performes list action.

#### Story 3
It is hard to known how many item in informer queue/store. Add metrics for queue/store, it will help developers to find the number of pending deltas.

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

<!--
What are the caveats to the proposal?
What are some important details that didn't come across above?
Go in to as much detail as necessary here.
This might be a good place to talk about core concepts and how they relate.
-->

N/A

### Risks and Mitigations

<!--
What are the risks of this proposal, and how do we mitigate? Think broadly.
For example, consider both security and how this will impact the larger
Kubernetes ecosystem.

How will security be reviewed, and by whom?

How will UX be reviewed, and by whom?

Consider including folks who also work outside the SIG or subproject.
-->

The informer metrics is disabled by default. When enable informer metrics, the newly added metrics will increase CPU/MEM usage. 

If the metrics result memory leak, users can disable the informer metrics.

> ## Design Details

Reviewer: looks like a previous attempt failed on stops not removing metrics, thus producing a leak: https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/73587#issuecomment-459335009.  This should be explicitly handled by this KEP.

Author: Added description about mitigating memory usage.

  // the eventHandler name
  NewPendingNotificationsMetric(name string) GaugeMetric
  NewRingGrowingMetric(name string) GaugeMetric
  NewPrcoessDurationMetric(name string) HistogramMetric
}

```

Add prometheus metrics item in subsystem `informer`

| name                         | labels             | description                                                                |
|------------------------------|--------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| store_item_total             | informer name      | Total number of item in store                                              |
| queued_item_total            | informer name      | Total number of item in queue                                              |
| pending_notifications_total  | eventHandler name  | Total number of pending notifications in eventHandler RingGrowing          |
| ring_growing_capacity        | eventHandler name  | Capacity of eventHandler RingGrowing                                       |
| event_process_duration       | eventHandler name  | How long in seconds eventHandler processing an item from RingGrowing takes |

> Add an environment `ENABLE_INFORMER_METRICS` to enable informer metrics, it is disable by default.

Reviewer: We now have client-go featuregates.  I suggest using those: https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/staging/src/k8s.io/client-go/features/known_features.go#L48

Author: Replace it with feature gate InformerMetrics

to implement this enhancement and provide the current unit coverage for those
in the form of:
- <package>: <date> - <current test coverage>
The data can be easily read from:
https://testgrid.k8s.io/sig-testing-canaries#ci-kubernetes-coverage-unit

This can inform certain test coverage improvements that we want to do before
extending the production code to implement this enhancement.
-->

- `<package>`: `<date>` - `<test coverage>`

##### Integration tests

<!--
Integration tests are contained in k8s.io/kubernetes/test/integration.
Integration tests allow control of the configuration parameters used to start the binaries under test.
This is different from e2e tests which do not allow configuration of parameters.
Doing this allows testing non-default options and multiple different and potentially conflicting command line options.
-->

<!--
This question should be filled when targeting a release.
For Alpha, describe what tests will be added to ensure proper quality of the enhancement.

For Beta and GA, add links to added tests together with links to k8s-triage for those tests:
https://storage.googleapis.com/k8s-triage/index.html
-->

> - <test>: <link to test coverage>

Reviewer: ensure that stops of informers and reflectors remove the metrics.

Author: Added it, PTAL

  CRI or CNI may require updating that component before the kubelet.
-->

N/A

## Production Readiness Review Questionnaire

<!--

Production readiness reviews are intended to ensure that features merging into
Kubernetes are observable, scalable and supportable; can be safely operated in
production environments, and can be disabled or rolled back in the event they
cause increased failures in production. See more in the PRR KEP at
https://git.k8s.io/enhancements/keps/sig-architecture/1194-prod-readiness.

The production readiness review questionnaire must be completed and approved
for the KEP to move to `implementable` status and be included in the release.

In some cases, the questions below should also have answers in `kep.yaml`. This
is to enable automation to verify the presence of the review, and to reduce review
burden and latency.

The KEP must have a approver from the
[`prod-readiness-approvers`](http://git.k8s.io/enhancements/OWNERS_ALIASES)
team. Please reach out on the
[#prod-readiness](https://kubernetes.slack.com/archives/CPNHUMN74) channel if
you need any help or guidance.
-->

### Feature Enablement and Rollback

<!--

> This section must be completed when targeting alpha to a release.

Reviewer: this section needs to be filled in.

Author: This section has beed filled

for each individual pod.
Pick one more of these and delete the rest.
Please describe all items visible to end users below with sufficient detail so that they can verify correct enablement
and operation of this feature.
Recall that end users cannot usually observe component logs or access metrics.
-->

- [ ] Events
  - Event Reason: 
- [ ] API .status
  - Condition name: 
  - Other field: 
- [ ] Other (treat as last resort)
  - Details:

###### What are the reasonable SLOs (Service Level Objectives) for the enhancement?

<!--
This is your opportunity to define what "normal" quality of service looks like
for a feature.

It's impossible to provide comprehensive guidance, but at the very
high level (needs more precise definitions) those may be things like:
  - per-day percentage of API calls finishing with 5XX errors <= 1%
  - 99% percentile over day of absolute value from (job creation time minus expected
    job creation time) for cron job <= 10%
  - 99.9% of /health requests per day finish with 200 code

These goals will help you determine what you need to measure (SLIs) in the next
question.
-->

> ###### What are the SLIs (Service Level Indicators) an operator can use to determine the health of the service?

Reviewer: this should indicate memory usage explicitly

Author: Added it, PTAL

Reviewer 2: `process_resident_memory_bytes` and `process_virtual_memory_bytes` should probably be mentioned specifically.

### Goals

<!--
List the specific goals of the KEP. What is it trying to achieve? How will we
know that this has succeeded?
-->

- Add metrics for informer 
- Expose informer reflector/queue/eventHandler metrics

### Non-Goals

<!--
What is out of scope for this KEP? Listing non-goals helps to focus discussion
and make progress.
-->

- It does not introduce breaking changes for controllers which use informer.
- It does not modify core Kubernetes components which use informer.
- It does not list all informer metrics, which can add as needed

## Proposal

<!--
This is where we get down to the specifics of what the proposal actually is.
This should have enough detail that reviewers can understand exactly what
you're proposing, but should not include things like API designs or
implementation. What is the desired outcome and how do we measure success?.
The "Design Details" section below is for the real
nitty-gritty.
-->

- Introduce the informer metrics struct `informerMetrics` contains queue/eventHandler metrics
- Introduce the informer metrics provider interface `informerMetricsProvider`, implement in `k8s.io/component-base/metrics`

> - Add an environment to enable informer metrics

Reviewer 3: why do we need an environment variable to enable them?

Reviewer: > why do we need an environment variable to enable them?

I think this got updated to a featuregate.  This type of metric has been attempted at least once (maybe twice?) and reverted for problems each time.  Being able to disable our first attempt could help avoid a rush to patch all the impacted clients.

Author: Replace it with featuregate, PTAL

Reviewer: > Replace it with featuregate, PTAL

forgot to push?

- Revert the deleted `reflectorMetrics`

### User Stories (Optional)

<!--
Detail the things that people will be able to do if this KEP is implemented.
Include as much detail as possible so that people can understand the "how" of
the system. The goal here is to make this feel real for users without getting
bogged down.
-->

#### Story 1

> Client-go informer create a RingGrowing `pendingNotifications` for every eventHandler. This RingGrowing will grow, but never shrink. An informer has some eventHandlers, it is hard to distinguish which `pendingNotifications` linked to a lot of object. The `pendingNotifications` metrics  will help developers to distinguish which eventHandler is slow.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Client-go informer create a RingGrowing `pendingNotifications` for every eventHandler. This RingGrowing will grow, but never shrink. An informer has some eventHandlers, it is hard to distinguish which `pendingNotifications` linked to a lot of objects. The `pendingNotifications` metric will help developers distinguish the slow eventHandler.
```

#### Story 2

> Users want to know how many times the reflector performes list action.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Users want to know how often the reflector performs a `LIST`.
```

| name                         | labels             | description                                                                |
|------------------------------|--------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| store_item_total             | informer name      | Total number of item in store                                              |
| queued_item_total            | informer name      | Total number of item in queue                                              |
| pending_notifications_total  | eventHandler name  | Total number of pending notifications in eventHandler RingGrowing          |
| ring_growing_capacity        | eventHandler name  | Capacity of eventHandler RingGrowing                                       |
| event_process_duration       | eventHandler name  | How long in seconds eventHandler processing an item from RingGrowing takes |

### Reflector metrics
This change https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/74636 will be reverted.

Each reflector metrics contains 3 counter, 4 summary and 1 gauge.
```
type reflectorMetrics struct {
	numberOfLists       CounterMetric
	listDuration        SummaryMetric

> 	numberOfItemsInList SummaryMetric

Reviewer 2: SummaryMetrics are non-aggregatable. It'd be better to use histograms instead.

existing tests to make this code solid enough prior to committing the changes necessary
to implement this enhancement.

##### Prerequisite testing updates

<!--
Based on reviewers feedback describe what additional tests need to be added prior
implementing this enhancement to ensure the enhancements have also solid foundations.
-->

##### Unit tests

<!--
In principle every added code should have complete unit test coverage, so providing
the exact set of tests will not bring additional value.
However, if complete unit test coverage is not possible, explain the reason of it
together with explanation why this is acceptable.
-->

<!--
Additionally, for Alpha try to enumerate the core package you will be touching
to implement this enhancement and provide the current unit coverage for those
in the form of:
- <package>: <date> - <current test coverage>
The data can be easily read from:
https://testgrid.k8s.io/sig-testing-canaries#ci-kubernetes-coverage-unit

This can inform certain test coverage improvements that we want to do before
extending the production code to implement this enhancement.
-->

- `<package>`: `<date>` - `<test coverage>`

> ##### Integration tests

Reviewer 3: IIRC there was some tests for metrics and granularity of them @logicalhan @dgrisonnet can you help us here?

Reviewer 4: We do have some precedence of integration tests for metrics such as these ones for the apiserver: https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/87fa400d9ddf4fa48ab32a7d745a3b60dc785e5d/test/integration/metrics/metrics_test.go as well as some utilities to write some https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/87fa400d9ddf4fa48ab32a7d745a3b60dc785e5d/staging/src/k8s.io/component-base/metrics/testutil/testutil.go.

Author: Add some tests  for metrics subsystem/label/granularity, PTAL

Reviewer: > Add some tests for metrics subsystem/label/granularity, PTAL

forgot to push?

for the KEP to move to `implementable` status and be included in the release.

In some cases, the questions below should also have answers in `kep.yaml`. This
is to enable automation to verify the presence of the review, and to reduce review
burden and latency.

The KEP must have a approver from the
[`prod-readiness-approvers`](http://git.k8s.io/enhancements/OWNERS_ALIASES)
team. Please reach out on the
[#prod-readiness](https://kubernetes.slack.com/archives/CPNHUMN74) channel if
you need any help or guidance.
-->

### Feature Enablement and Rollback

<!--
This section must be completed when targeting alpha to a release.
-->

###### How can this feature be enabled / disabled in a live cluster?

<!--
Pick one of these and delete the rest.

Documentation is available on [feature gate lifecycle] and expectations, as
well as the [existing list] of feature gates.

[feature gate lifecycle]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/feature-gates.md
[existing list]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/
-->

- [ ] Feature gate (also fill in values in `kep.yaml`)

>   - Feature gate name: InformerMetrics

Reviewer 3: do we need a feature gate for metrics @logicalhan @deads2k ?

Reviewer: > do we need a feature gate for metrics @logicalhan @deads2k ?

I would ordinarily say no, but these in particular have been attempted at least once (I think twice) and reverted after causing issues in the field.

Reviewer 2: Yeah I like a feature gate here, particularly because we've been burned before.
